---
layout: post
title: My law school held a town hall about Charlottesville.
description: Could the violence at the Unite The Right rally been prevented by good lawyering?
seo_title: UC Davis School of Law held a town hall about Charlottesville.
---

Can I reconcile my differences with people who believe that my life and presence deserve to be terminated? Is it on me to listen to their pain and understand their grievances, and to seek their remedy? Is it just that the moral fiber of this nation seems mostly to be the responsibility of the very people it is actively oppressing?

These are the questions floating in my mind as I sit in this open forum that King Hall is holding on the Charlottesville incident — or *massacre*, as Professor Mary Frampton calls it. Her general point is that it is on us, on people who want to steer this nation to a just and equitable future to separate the various areas of the political conversation, using critical reasoning, to find *common ground* between opposing groups. For example, that the conversation around Confederate monuments can be separated from the conversation on racial grievances in policing. She compared the "Charlottesville massacre" to the Greensboro massacre of 1979, which is in her area of expertise, as she had worked for years to heal the community trauma that resulted from it. She seems to be optimistic that the techniques she is using to heal the Greensboro trauma today can be used to address the fresh pain of the Charlottesville community, and of the nation at large. I am not as optimistic.

Professor Aaron Tang brought a more technical spin to the conversation. He contended that the violence at Charlottesville could have been mitigated or prevented by better lawyering. When the Unite The Right rally was granted a protest permit in May 2017, it spurred many counter-protest groups to also file permits. That made it apparent very early that the rally posed a serious security risk to the people of Charlottesville. To address that risk, the city of Charlottesville moved to change the location of the Unite The Right rally from the narrow Emancipation Park to a much larger venue nearby. They argued before federal court that it would be easier to provide police protection in the larger venue, and they were correct in that. However, the federal district court struck down their motion because the manner in which the city acted in the case violated the First Amendment. The city had moved to change the location of the United The Right protest permit, but had not moved to change the locations of the many counter-protest permits it had already granted. The First Amendment requires that such changes in protest venue be decided with no regard to the *content* of the protest. Because the city had not also moved the counter-protests, it was obvious that their decision to alter the Unite The Right permit was based on content.

Better lawyering on the side of the city would likely have saved Heather Meyer's life. Competence, after all, is a professional duty of every lawyer.

This topic is depressing, and bitter are my thoughts as I walk away from this discussion, yet I also feel, in a sense, emboldened by the way this conversation today was carried out. There was a solid forty minutes of public comment from the law school community following the professors' presentations, yet not once did we stray from the matter at hand. It was clear that those of us who spoke had sufficiently processed their thoughts and feelings on the matter, and those of us who have not, did not speak. I appreciate that now.